---
authors: George V. Neville-Neil <gnn@neville-neil.com>
state: draft
---

<!-- 
	This document is subject to the terms of BSD 2 Clause License.
    See LICENSE in this repository for more information.

    Copyright 2017 George V. Neville-Neil
-->

# RFD 1 mbuf handling subroutine

## Problem Statement

Data in BSD derived network stacks resides in `mbuf` chains.  The D
language does not currently have any routines for giving D programs
access to chained `mbuf` data.  The current RFD aims to add a new D
subroutine for use by D programs in looking at data in an `mbuf`
chain.

## User Visibility

One new sub-routines will be defined to give access to data in `mbuf`
chains.  The interface is described in the following sections.

## Public Interfaces

### `copyoutmbuf`

```
copyoutmbuf(struct mbuf *m, size_t length, [size_t offset])
```

The `copyoutmbuf` subroutine operates in a similar manner to the
currently existing `copy` interfaces in OpenDTrace It has two required
arguments: a pointer to an mbuf structure (`struct mbuf *`) and a
`length`.  If the length is specified as 0 then the subroutine will
attempt to copy out all of the data in the mbuf chain, starting from
the beginning.  It is possible for D's limited scratch space to run
out during this operation and so the subroutine may fail with an out
of memory condition.  An optional third argument, `offset`, allows the
caller to request data starting after the beginning of the mbuf
chain, which can be used to skip over headers that are not of interest
to the caller.

## Private Interfaces

Both of the new public subroutines described above depend on a single,
new, internal interface, `dtrace_mbuf_copydata()`, which operates in a
similar manner to the FreeBSD kernel's `mbuf_copydata()` routine but
which is implemented using the OpenDTrace safe copy routines.

## Upgrade Impact

The new subroutine has no effect on existing systems as the they are
completely new, and do not modify existing interfaces.

The version of DTrace will be increased once the new subroutine is
added.

## Security Impact

The new subroutine present no new security issues for the OpenDTrace
system.

## References

