---
authors: Graeme Jenkinson <gcj21@cl.cam.ac.uk>
state: draft
---

<!-- 
	This document is subject to the terms of BSD 2 Clause License.
    See LICENSE in this repository for more information.

    Copyright 2017 Graeme Jenkinson
-->

# RFD 004 UUIDv5 naming of aggregations and enablings

## Problem Statement

Local names are ubiquitious in DTrace.
Currently, DTrace identifies both aggregations (`dtrace_aggid_t`) and probes
(`dtrace_id_t`) with simple numerical identifiers (32-bit unsigned integers).
The values of these identifiers depends on the current kernel state.  For
example, aggregation identifiers are assigned by a kernel unit allocator
(`vmem_alloc()` on Illumos and `alloc_unr()` on FreeBSD). The value returned by
the allocator is clearly dependent on the previously allocated/freed values,
which in turn depends on the current DTrace enablings. This is problematic in
a distributed setting as no guarantees are provided that the same
aggregation computed across a set of machines will be identified consitently.

We propose that, as a foundation for distributed tracing, DTrace is extended
to identify aggregations and enablings with a v5 128-bit UUID. As UUIDs impose
an additional 96-bit overhead per trace record, using UUID-based identifiers will
be enabled through an additional option to the `dtrace` command line tool.

An aggregation's UUID will be created based on a name, formed by concatenating 
a unique namespace, the aggregation's name and the components of its key.
For example, the aggregation `@a[probefunc, arg0]` results in a UUID based on
a hash as follows: `h(namespace|a|probefunc|arg0)` (Note although it isn't
possible to have the same name for an aggregation with different keys on a single
machine. Machines in a distributed system could have an aggregation with the same
name but with different keys: `@b[probefunc]`, `@b[probefunc, arg0]`.)

A probe's UUID will be created from the traditional name _4-tuple_
`provider:module:function:name`. A unique identifier prevents multiple probes 
being created with the same human readable name, which is at best undesirable
especially in an adverserial environment.

In a heterogenous environment a probe with the same human readable name may take
different arguments or have completely different semantics. This is out of scope
for this proposal.

Similarly to aggregations, DTrace enablings are identified by a monotonically
increasing numerical identifier of type `dtrace_epid_t` (an unsigned 32-bit
integer) and as a result the same enabling on a different machine can posses a
completly different identifier. The enabling's identifier determines the
semantics of a given trace record and is used to lookup metadata used to interpret
trace records. Thus, it is unnecessary to ensure that an enabling possesses the
same indentifier across a range of system provide that the identifier is unique
for a given target machine.

## User Visibility

A new option will be added to the `dtrace` command to enable UUID-based naming. 

We propose that aggregations and enablings identifiers are created within a unique namespace.
The namespace allows identical aggregations and enablings to be processed
differently and also identifies separate streams of records in the trace buffer;
similarly to the use of the trace UUID in the Common Trace Format [1]. The
user will specify the namespace (as either a UUID or textual name) in the submitted D script.

The trace namespace could be extended in the D langauge as follows:

```
namespace 6ba7b814-9dad-11d1-80b4-00c04fd430c8 {

	syscall:::entry {
	}

}
```

alternatively a textual name could be used when specifying the namespace
(this value is hashed to derive a UUIDv5 identifier used as the namespace for identifying the
contained aggregations and enablings):

```
namespace cadets-trace {

	syscall:::entry {
	}
}
```

It is also envisaged that the namespace may indicate sets of probes that are to be handled 
differently. For example, in a distributed system the namespace may specify a set
of probes that are used to instrument database or webservers. Similarly the namespace
could indicate that the probes are installed in a guest virtual machine:

```
# Default namespace
fbt::vm_fault:entry {
  ....
}

namespace db {

	syscall::open:entry {
	   ...
	}
}
```

Other examples may be machines running different operating systems or different version of the 
same operating system.

```
namespace old_version {

	fbt::function_old_name:entry {
	  ....
	}
}

namespace new_version {

	fbt::function_new_name:entry {
	   ...
	}
}
```

It is possible that namespace is the wrong term for the scoping of a set of probes.
An alternative view is that probes are being added to a set (`probeset`),
and each set of probes may be handled differently.

```
probeset cadets {

	[probe] syscall::open:entry
	{
	   ...
	}
}
```

## Public Interfaces

The proposed changes have no forseen impact on public interfaces.

## Private Interfaces

Various changes to the D compiler will be needed to extend the D language to
become namespace aware. Further investigation is required once the exact
mechanism has been agreed upon.

## Upgrade Impact

The proposed changes have no forseen impact on code or scripts from earlier versions.

## Security Impact

The use of unique, deterministicall generated probe identifiers removes potential confusion
about probes which may be exploited by an adversary.

## References

[1] The Common Trace Format. http://diamon.org/ctf/
