---
authors: Graeme Jenkinson <gcj21@cl.cam.ac.uk>
state: draft
---

<!-- 
	This document is subject to the terms of BSD 2 Clause License.
    See LICENSE in this repository for more information.

    Copyright 2017 Graeme Jenkinson
-->

# RFD 0005 Unify trace data and metdata

## Problem Statement

The separation of the trace buffer and the metadata (required to interpret it)  is a central design choice
in the implementation of DTrace.
Whilst this decision remains sound, it's implementation is complex requiring clients to invoke 
multiple `ioctl`s to retrieve (and cache) a number of data structures (primarily `dtrace_recdesc_t`
and `dt_pfargv_t`).

One possible design on a distributed DTrace requires that the records within the trace buffer
are processed on a different machine from where they were captured (that is, where the trace was captured).
In this scenario, the metadata required to interpret the trace buffer must itself be
serialized, transmitted and deserialized on the machine that is processing the trace buffer.
A prototype implementation has demonstrated the feasibility of serialising (using Cap'n'Proto)
both the  `dtrace_probedata_t` data structure and trace buffer. This prototype allows traces captured
on one mavhine to be printed on a separate and independent machine.
However, the sheer number of data structures needed to be serialised makes this a less then straightforward task.

We propose, that trace metadata is returned as a fixed-format record within the trace buffer.
Metadata records will be identifified using a reserved identifier (`MID`). Metadata
records contain a fixed format. Initially, one type of metadata record shall be supported.
This record specifies a canonical serialisation of the data structures currently used by DTrace
to interpret records within the trace buffer.
Unifying the metadata within the trace buffer simplifies the `libdtrace` reducing the number of
`ioctls` required to parse the trace. And also simplifies the taks of serialising data for
processing remotely.

These changes underpin the ability to change the encoding of records in the trace buffer;
a different encoding of the trace buffer can be supported by returning a new type
of metadata record which DTrace consumers can interpret. This decouples consumers from the
kernel-level data structures used to store records within the trace buffer. Different encodings
of the trace buffer could support packing (for example, run length encoding when tracing memory) or
allow compatibility with other tracing tools.

## User Visibility

The proposed changes have no forseen impact on users.

## Public Interfaces

The proposed changes have no forseen impact on public interfaces.

## Private Interfaces

Changes TODO.

The proposed changes have no forseen impact on code or scripts from earlier versions.

## Security Impact

The proposed changes have no forseen security impact.

## References
