---
authors: George V. Neville-Neil <gnn@neville-neil.com>
state: draft
---

<!-- 
	This document is subject to the terms of BSD 2 Clause License.
    See LICENSE in this repository for more information.

    Copyright 2017 George V. Neville-Neil
-->

# RFD 0003 dt_probe system call

## Problem Statement

There exist a set of programs that want to be able to pass information
through DTrace, independently of DTrace tracing the program itself.
While the `USDT` provider allows DTrace to look into and inspect
functions within compiled programs a program that wishes to
communicate with DTrace does not currently have a clean interface to
the DTrace system.  Fort this purpose we introduce a new system call
`dt_probe` which exposes the `dtrace_probe` routine from the kernel to
user space programs.

## User Visibility

A new system call is made available to user space programs:

```
void dt_probe((uintptr_t)arg0, (uintptr_t)arg1, (uintptr_t)arg2,
              (uintptr_t)arg3, (uintptr_t)arg4, (uintptr_t)arg5);
```

The `dt_probe` system call mirrors the `dtrace_probe` routine used in
the kernel.

A new `SDT` probe point is added to handle this new probe:

```
sdt:::dt_probe
```

which takes the data passed from the user space program, through the
kernel, and out from DTrace.

## Public Interfaces

The `dt_probe` system call and `sdt:::dt_probe` probe point are the
only new, public, interfaces.  No other public interfaces will be
updated or changed.

## Private Interfaces

The `dt_probe` system call uses the pre-existing `dtrace_probe`
routine in the kernel and simply connects a system call to that
interface.  We will not be adding any other, new, DTrace specific,
interfaces to the system.

## Upgrade Impact

The `dt_probe` system call and probe point represent new interfaces
and will not effect code or scripts from earlier versions of DTrace.

## Security Impact

The main security risk from this system call is if there is a way to
cause code to be executed in the kernel by passing data into the
kernel.  Programs that wish to use the `dt_probe` call will not need
any special privileges.  Arguments passed to the `dt_probe` routine
will not be processed by the kernel but passed through, unmolested.

## References
