---
author: George V. Neville-Neil <gnn@neville-neil.com>
state: draft
---

<!-- 
	This document is subject to the terms of BSD 2 Clause License.
    See LICENSE in this repository for more information.

    Copyright 2017 <gnn@neville-neil.com>
-->

# RFD 0 Requests for Discussion Process and Authoring Guide

Requests for Discussion are an idea originally promulgated by Joyent
and based on the work with Requests for Comments, originating with the
IETF.  The OpenDTrace project assumes the same model of discussion and
collaboration as to the addition of new features.

Unlike RFCs from the IETF, our RFDs are maintained in Markdown format
which gives us a bit more formal formatting structure and is also a
format that is broadly used in the open source world.

If you are unfamiliar with the IETF's Request for Comments (RFC)
system please read [RFC 3](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3).

RFDs also use the IETF interpretations of the key words "MUST", "MUST
NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT",
"RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" as defined in [RFC 2119](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2119).

The rest of this RFD documents why and how to write one.

## When should I write an RFD?

Most software developers do not think about writing documents before
code, even if most of us will also protest the opposite.  RFDs really
are about systemic changes to the DTrace system, rather than small bug
fixes.  Because DTrace has many types of users, including systems
administrators, and software developers, an RFD MUST be written 

* Creating, changing or removing a D language visible subroutine.
* Creating, changing or removing a DIF instruction.
* Changes to the DIF format.
* Adding new commands or adding new options to the dtrace command.
* Changing the behavior of commands,
* Anything that changes how users, defined above, interact with DTrace.

Every RFD MUST have a title that is a simple synopsis of the
document. Titles are not fixed; RFDs are numbered to allow the title
to change.  An RFD SHOULD address the following questions:

##### Title

This is a simple synopsis of the document. Note, the title is not fixed.
It may change as the RFD evolves.

##### What is the problem you're trying to solve?

The classic question for anyone who wants to change or enhance an
existing system.  The problem you're trying to solve is the goal you
wish to achieve, whether it's a new feature, a change to an existing
one, or the removal of an ambiguity in how the system works.

##### How will users interact with these new or changed features?

You MUST consider all users of the system, and not just a specific
itch that you wish to scratch.  How will this change effect existing D
scripts or other integrations with DTrace such as programs that link
against libdtrace.  You MUST also consider how these changes might
effect those who have written wrapper scripts for D and DTrace.

##### List the public private interfaces that are changing.

If a public interface, such as a command line program or its
arguments, D subroutine, is to be changed then list it here along with
a brief, 1 or 2 line, description of the intended change.

Changes to private interfaces, those consumed by other internal parts
of DTrace MUST also be listed with a similarly brief description of
the intended change.

##### What is the upgrade impact?

What are the implications to current users of DTrace if they upgrade
their systems to a newer version that includes this change?  Any such
changes MUST be added to the UPDATING file in the main OpenDTrace
repository.

##### What is the security impact?

What (untrusted) user input (including both data and code) will be be
made visible to the system as part of the change?  Which components
will interact with that input?  How will that input be validated and
managed securely?  What new or changed privileges will your
feature require?  How might an attacker use the proposed facilities to
escalate their privileges?

## Mechanics of an RFD

To create a new RFD, you MUST take the following steps.

### Allocate a new RFD number

RFDs are numbered starting at 0, this RFD, and then increase from
there. When you start, you MUST allocate the next currently unused
number. Note that if someone puts back to the repository before you,
then you MUST increase your number to the next available one. If
the next RFD would be number 42, then you should make the file
file rfd-0042.md in the drafts directory. Note, that while we use four
digits in the directories and numbering, when referring to an RFD, you
do not need to use the leading zeros.

```
$ git pull
$ cp templates/template.md rfd/drafts/rfd-0042.md
$ git add rfd/drafts/rfd-0042.md
$ git commit
$ git push
```

### Write the RFD

RFDs MUST have a default text width of 80 characters. Any other
materials related to an RFD SHOULD be named rfd-XXXX-file-name.type
such as rfd-0042-example-code.c.

#### RFD Meta data and State

Every RFD document starts with a brief amount of meta-data based
on:
[python-markdown2](https://github.com/trentm/python-markdown2/wiki/metadata) metadata
format and looks like this:

```
---
authors: Arthur Dent <adent@megadodo.com>, Ford Prefect <fp@megadodo.com>
state: draft
---
```

Only the `authors`, and the `state` are tracked.  There MAY be any
number of `authors`, they MUST be listed with their name and e-mail
address for proper attribution.

An RFD can be in one of the following four states:

1. draft
1. publish
1. abandoned

The `draft` state is where all discussion of the RFD takes place.  It
is customary to not comment on a draft the author(s) request such
commentary in an email to the mailing list.

When the discussion on a document has come to a suitable and
acceptable close it SHOULD be updated to the `publish` state.

Just because something is in the `publish` state does not mean that it
cannot be updated and corrected. See the "Touching up" section for
more information.

If an RFD is not viable or if an RFD must be ignored, it can be moved
into the `abandoned` state.

### Start the discussion

Once the author(s) have reached a point where they're ready to discuss
their thoughts they MUST first push the latest changes to the
repository and then send an e-mail to the mailing list announcing the
Request for Discussion.

The subject of the message MUST be the RFD number and synopsis. For
example, if you RFD number 0 with the title Addition of new mbuf
subroutines, then the subject would be `RFD 0 Requests for Discussion
Process and Authoring Guide `.

Make sure to include a link to the RFD in the body of the email..

### Finishing up

When discussion has wrapped up and the relevant feedback has been
incorporated, then you change the state of the document to `publish`,
move the document out of the `drafts` directory, and push your changes

```
$ cd drafts
$ git mv rfc-0042.md ..
$ git commit
$ git push
```

### Changes after publishing

RFDs may need to be revised after they have been moved into the
`publish` state.  If the changes are minor then you SHOULD update the
RFD but if the changes are similar to those in Section 1.1 you
SHOULD abandon the current RFD and start a new one.

